%------------------------------------------------------------------------------%
%                                   the nist                                   %
%------------------------------------------------------------------------------%

\section{The NIST}

The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) is an agency of the
United States Department of Commerce (DOC) \cite{enwiki:nist}. The National
Bureau of Standards (NBS), also known as the National Metrological Institute
(NMI), was founded in 1901, and it has been renamed NIST in 1988. The NIST's
role is to promote the innovation and the industrial competitiveness of the
United States. Its mission is composed of three main core functions: developing
measurement technology and techniques, create a maintain standards, and support
advancement in technology. The research that are conducted at the institute
impact several areas such as Health, Energy, Manufacturing, Cybersecurity,
Artificial Intelligence, High Performance Calculus, \dots\\

The NIST is composed of three laboratories. The \textit{Physical Measurement
Laboratory} (PML) is re possible of innovating precise measurements methods in
physics, chemistry, and engineering. The \textit{Information Technology
Laboratory} (ITL) develops IT standards and works mainly on Artificial
Intelligence, Cybersecurity and High Performance Calculus. Finally, the
\textit{Material Measurement Laboratory} (MML) perform research on materials,
nanotechnologies and biomaterials. Each laboratory is subdivided into divisions
and the divisions are splatted into groups. This internship has been realized in
the \textit{Information Systems} group directed by Walid Keyrouz. This group is
a part of the \textit{Software and Systems} divisions of the Information
Technology Laboratory. The division is directed by Janet E. Madison.
